Paper: Seismic Roots
====================

Using :math:`V_p` and :math:`V_s` to Characterize the Spatial Extent of Shear Strengthening Under a Longleaf Pine
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Key Points**

-  P-wave (:math:`V_p`) and S-wave (:math:`V_s`) velocities can be used
   to study the rooting zone under trees.

-  Soil modified by roots caused an increase in shear strength under the
   tree, resulting in low :math:`V_p`/:math:`V_s` values.

-  Low :math:`V_p`/:math:`V_s` values indicate tree-modified soil in the
   region where normal shear failure from vertical loading is likely to
   occur.

Introduction
------------

Trees are the tallest freestanding structures in nature and populate
nearly every landscape on Earth. Some trees reach heights exceeding 120
m (Tredici 1999; Hickey, Kostoglou, and Sargison 2000), while others
stand for thousands of years (Currey 1965). Trees are slender,
top-heavy, and inherently unstable (Sellier and Suzuki 2020). Due to
their towering heights and expansive canopies, it is often assumed that
tree roots mirror the canopy structure and extend deep into the soil.
However, a global compilation of tree rooting depths indicate that this
assumption is generally incorrect (Canadell et al. 1996; Jackson et al.
1996). Although roots have been reported at depths of up to 68 m, the
average rooting depth is only 7.1 :math:`\pm` 1.2 m (n = 82) (Canadell
et al. 1996). Furthermore, global observations show that 86% of a tree’s
roots are located within the top 30 cm of soil (Jackson et al. 1996).

Despite their shallow depth, roots anchor trees to the soil, enabling
them to grow upright against gravity and resist lateral wind loads
(Sellier and Suzuki 2020; Ancelin, Courbaud, and Fourcaud 2004; Dupuy et
al. 2007). Roots often distribute themselves asymmetrically around the
tree to compensate for additional lateral loading caused by slopes
(Taufiqurrachman et al. 2023) and to counteract forces from prevailing
winds (Montagnoli et al. 2019). Individual roots also adapt structurally
as they grow, forming I-beams or T-beams to enhance mechanical support
(Danjon, Fourcaud, and Bert 2005; Dumroese et al. 2019). As roots
develop, they modify the soil’s mechanical properties by increasing its
shear strength (Giadrossich et al. 2017). Shear strength is defined as
the maximum shear stress the soil can withstand before failure.

The Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion is one of the simplest and most
widely used models for describing soil failure (Labuz and Zang 2012). It
defines shear strength using two quantifiable properties: (1) soil
cohesion (:math:`C`) and (2) the internal angle of friction
(:math:`\phi`). Materials with higher cohesion and friction angles
exhibit greater shear strength. Direct shear tests on soils with and
without roots have shown that rooted soils possess higher shear strength
than unrooted soils (Giadrossich et al. 2017). This increase is
attributed to the tensile strength of roots, which act as reinforcing
elements and enhance soil cohesion. As a result, soil–root systems
exhibit increased strength, even under zero confining stress (Abe and
Ziemer 1991; Li et al. 2024; Jian et al. 2024). Increases in cohesion
have been observed when roots were embedded in a soil matrix (Tomobe et
al. 2023; Ghestem et al. 2014; Stokes et al. 2009), collected from field
samples (Li et al. 2024; Jian et al. 2024), and grown in shear boxes for
up to ten months (Ali and Osman 2008).

The magnitude of shear strength enhancement depends on the root area and
diameter and the orientation relative to the shear failure plane
(Ghestem et al. 2014). Existing methods for measuring shear strength are
typically conducted on small volumes, often just a few cubic
centimeters. To increase sample volume, plants have been grown in large
testing apparatuses measuring several hundred cubic centimeters (Ali and
Osman 2008). Additionally, root pullout and overturning tests, performed
both in situ and in laboratory settings, have investigated tree failure
mechanisms (Kevern and Hallauer 1983; Docker and Hubble 2008; Mickovski
and Ennos 2002). However, the destructive nature of these tests,
combined with unknown root architecture and uncertain biomechanical
properties, leaves many questions unanswered about how external loads
are transferred through roots into the soil. Currently, a
non-destructive method does not exist to characterize the mechanical
impact of roots in situ under living trees.

This lack of methodology exists because roots are difficult to
characterize without harming the tree (Miller, Allen, and Maier 2006).
Non-invasive technologies for root characterization include sonic root
tools (Proto et al. 2020) and electrical resistivity methods (Robinson,
Slater, and Schäfer 2012; Ehosioke et al. 2020). Among these,
ground-penetrating radar (GPR) offers the highest resolution and can
produce detailed maps of coarse roots to depths of a few centimeters
(Hruska, Čermák, and Šustek 1999; Butnor et al. 2001; Guo et al. 2013;
Zajícová and Chuman 2019). However, GPR is limited to detecting shallow
lateral roots and cannot resolve roots located directly beneath the
trunk. Vertical roots directly below the tree are particularly difficult
to characterize because they are obscured by both soil and the tree
trunk, yet they are critical for tree stability. For example, the
taproot of marine pine trees in France accounts for over 60% of strain
under large lateral loads (M. Yang et al. 2014). Additionally, extracted
3D root networks of pines reveal multiple vertically oriented roots
forming a cage-like structure around the taproot, which enhances soil
shear strength (Danjon, Fourcaud, and Bert 2005; Brantley et al. 2011;
M. Yang et al. 2014; X.-D. Yang et al. 2019; Dumroese et al. 2019).
Despite its resolution, GPR cannot quantify the mechanical effects of
roots on soil, and vertical roots beneath the trunk remain unmeasured.

Seismic refraction is a promising non-invasive, near-surface geophysical
method. It can characterize the soil-root composite directly beneath the
trunk without harming the tree. Over the past decade, seismic
refraction, particularly travel-time tomography, has proven to be a
powerful tool. It has imaged subsurface structures beneath hillslopes
(Zelt et al. 2013; Sheehan, Doll, and Mandell 2005; Befus et al. 2011;
Holbrook et al. 2014) and watersheds (Brady A. Flinchum et al. 2018;
Uecker et al. 2023). In isotropic elastic materials, seismic velocities
are governed by compressibility, shear resistance, and density. Thus,
velocities depend on the mechanical properties of the soil-root matrix
at small strains.

This study aimed to investigate the relationship between root structure
and soil shear strength using high-resolution seismic refraction
surveys. At the South Carolina Botanical Gardens, two profiles of P-wave
(:math:`V_{p}`) and horizontally polarized S-wave (:math:`V_{s}`)
velocities were collected around a 31 m tall longleaf pine (*Pinus
palustris*). The results showed minimal changes in :math:`V_{p}`, but
increases in :math:`V_{s}` produced low (:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}`) values
(<1.5) directly beneath the tree. The increased :math:`V_{s}`, suggested
that vertical roots beneath the trunk increased the soil’s shear
stiffness. The minimal changes in :math:`V_{p}` indicated that the soil
was not compressed and likely remained porous. Additionally, the
structure of the (:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}`) values resembled the expected
shear failure envelope defined by the Prandtl Wedge (Van Baars 2018).
This similarity supports the hypothesis that the tree may
opportunistically grow roots to reinforce soil along the shear failure
plane, enabling continued growth.

Methods
-------

Three methods were used in this study. Structure-from-Motion (SfM) was
employed to generate a localized, high-resolution digital elevation
model (DEM) and a 3D point cloud. Two perpendicular shallow seismic
refraction profiles were collected, with the largest tree in the study
positioned at their intersection. :math:`V_{p}` and :math:`V_{s}`
velocities were calculated using travel-time tomography by inverting the
first arrivals of P-waves and transversely polarized S-waves (Figure
`1 <#map>`__). Finally, the resulting :math:`V_{p}` and :math:`V_{s}`
values were compared to the structures predicted by the general shear
failure envelope defined by Prandtl’s Wedge (Van Baars 2018).

Structure from Motion
---------------------

SfM was used to construct a high-resolution DEM with a spatial
resolution of 2 cm. The SfM model was generated from 425 photographs
taken with a Mavic Air 2 drone. Approximately 65% (275 of 425) of the
photos were captured at low elevation, with the camera oriented directly
toward the ground. The remaining 150 photographs were used to estimate
the aboveground structure. Agisoft Metashape, a semi-automatic
photogrammetry software, inverted for camera positions and orientations
by identifying common features in overlapping images (Metashape?; Lowe
1999). Once the position and orientation of each photo were known,
pixels from each image were reprojected into 3D space (Westoby et al.
2012; Micheletti, Chandler, and Lane 2015).

The SfM survey used six ground control points (GCPs) to scale the 3D
model. The GCPs were located using a robotic total station prior to
image acquisition and were used to define the local coordinate system.
In this coordinate system, seismic refraction profiles were aligned
along the *x* and *y* axes. However, these higher-elevation images
sacrificed detail of the trunk and ground, resulting in reduced point
cloud density from the ground to the trunk (Figure `1 <#map>`__\ a).
Tree height derived from the SfM model was compared to a high-resolution
(1 m) DEM from digital terrain models provided by USGS 3DEP.

The stand of trees was located in an open area with less than 50 cm of
relief (Figure `1 <#map>`__\ b). The high-resolution DEM revealed
elevated topography around the larger trees in the stand (Figure
`1 <#map>`__\ c). The longleaf pine at the intersection of the seismic
profiles had a DBH of 46 cm and was the largest tree in the stand (tree
#1 Figures `1 <#map>`__ and `2 <#seismicSetup>`__). The bases of these
surrounding trees had diameters ranging from 57 to 71 cm. Along profile
L1, at approximately 10 m, a second tree (tree #8) was offset by about 1
m from L1 and had a DBH of 24 cm. Profile L2 included two smaller trees
(trees #2 and #3) located closer to the seismic line. Tree #2,
positioned at -3 m along the profile, was one of the smallest in the
stand with a DBH of 22 cm. Tree #3, located just a few centimeters from
the profile at -1.5 m, was among the larger trees with a DBH of 35 cm
and offset L2 by approximately 50 cm. The diameter at breast height
(DBH) (1̃.4 m) of the trees in the study is provided in the Supplemental
Material.

.. figure:: Figures/af7d2e0f48f7c5a4323cfdcdaf8af4beba949eab.png
   :name: map
   :width: 80%
   :align: center


   (a) Reconstructed 3D point cloud of the longleaf pine (tree #1 in
   panel b), viewed along profile L1. (b) High-resolution DEM of the
   study area (2 cm resolution). Each tree is numbered for reference.
   The two seismic profiles are shown as black lines, with black circles
   marking the start of each profile. Red inverted triangles indicate
   the locations of geophones. (c) Magnified view of the base of the
   large pine. The trunk diameter at the soil interface ranges from 57
   cm to 71 cm, and the soil is visibly raised around the base.

Seismic Refraction
------------------

Two seismic refraction profiles, each 11.5 m long and oriented
perpendicular to one another, were collected with the largest tree (tree
#1) positioned at their intersection (Figures `1 <#map>`__,
`2 <#seismicSetup>`__). Both profiles used 24 geophones spaced at 50 cm
intervals. The spacing between the 12th and 13th geophones exceeded 50
cm to accommodate the large diameter at the base of the tree (see
Figures `1 <#map>`__\ c, `2 <#seismicSetup>`__). Shot points were
located at each geophone position. Each shot record was collected for
0.5 s with a sampling rate of 16.1 kHz. A maximum of 552 first-arrival
picks was possible for each profile.

To obtain P-wave velocities (:math:`V_p`), data were collected with 4.5
Hz vertical geophones and a sledgehammer striking a steel plate. Each
shot in the P-wave survey was stacked four times to improve
signal-to-noise. To obtain S-wave velocities (:math:`V_s`), the vertical
geophones were replaced with 4.5 Hz horizontal geophones oriented
perpendicular to the profile (Figure `2 <#seismicSetup>`__). The profile
was re-shot using a sledgehammer striking an I-beam that generated
transversely polarized S-waves. Each side of the I-beam was struck and
stacked four times, which produced two stacked shot records with
reversed polarity.

The final gather was created by subtracting the two reversed polarity
shot gathers (Uhlemann et al. 2016; Hunter et al. 2022). The reported
S-wave velocities :math:`V_{s}` in this study represent horizontal
S-wave velocities (:math:`V_{sh}`), not vertical S-wave velocities
(:math:`V_{sv}`).In isotropic and elastic media, S\ :sub:`h` waves are
decoupled from P-S\ :sub:`v` waves (Stein and Wysession 2003).
Therefore, S\ :sub:`h` waves do not produce mode conversions at
boundaries. Thus, the first arrivals from the S-wave surveys are
interpreted as refracted S\ :sub:`h` waves not direct or converted
P-waves.

First arrivals for both P- and S-waves were picked manually and then
inverted using travel-time tomography (Zelt et al. 2013; Sheehan, Doll,
and Mandell 2005). Due to the short offsets, the signal-to-noise ratio
was high, allowing over 90% of first arrivals to be picked without
filtering. The first-arrival times were inverted using the refraction
module in the Python Geophysical Inversion Modeling Library (PyGIMLi)
(Rücker, Günther, and Wagner 2017). The forward model assumed elastic
energy traveled as rays, computed using the shortest path algorithm
(Dijkstra 1959; T. Moser 1991; T. J. Moser, Nolet, and Snieder 1992).
Inversion was performed using a deterministic Gauss–Newton scheme that
minimized the :math:`\chi^2` error metric. Each arrival was assigned an
uncertainty of 0.5 ms. All arrivals were inverted on the same triangular
mesh, and identical smoothing parameters were applied to each model.

Uncertainty was estimated by inverting the first arrivals 100 times
using different starting velocity models. For the P-wave inversions, the
top velocity ranged from 100 to 1500 m/s, and the vertical velocity
gradient ranged from 3 to 30 m/s/m. For the S-wave inversions, the top
velocity ranged from 50 to 1000 m/s, with the same gradient range of 3
to 30 m/s/m. Final velocity models were computed by averaging the
velocity in each cell across all 100 inversions. The root mean square
errors (RMSE) were calculated by tracing rays through the model
generated from the mean of the 100 inversions and can be found in the
Supplemental Materials.

Each inverted model had slightly different ray coverage. To compare
:math:`V_{p}` and :math:`V_{s}`, a conservative masking procedure was
applied. The mask excluded model cells that had fewer than 25 rays
passing through them. For example, if a cell in the P-wave inversion was
intersected by ray paths in only 24 of the 100 inversions, it was
excluded from the profiles presented in the results. This conservative
approach ensured that the profiles shown in the results section
represent areas where :math:`V_{p}`, :math:`V_{s}`, and consequently
(:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}`) values were well constrained.

.. figure:: Figures/e4502c3e45d211a4eb97c9c5efd6a26ff24465ff.png
   :name: seismicSetup
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

   Images illustrating the collection of seismic refraction data. Tree
   labels correspond to those shown in Figure `1 <#map>`__. (a)
   Perspective view from the beginning of profile L1. Both vertical and
   horizontal geophones were deployed; however, the vertical geophones
   were not connected due to a limited number of recording channels. The
   vertical source was a small steel plate, while the horizontal source
   was a custom-made I-beam. Directions D1 and D2 indicate the
   orientation of the horizontal geophones. The I-beam source minimized
   vertical displacements and generated transversely polarized S-waves
   with opposite polarity. (b) Photograph showing the full deployment of
   profile L2.
   
   

General Shear Failure
---------------------

Like any freestanding structure, trees must overcome the force of
gravity. The concept of soil bearing capacity provides a framework for
interpreting the geophysical results. Soil bearing capacity defines the
maximum vertical load a soil can support before deforming beyond a
specified threshold. One model that describes how a solid body fails
under vertical loading is the Prandtl Wedge (Figure
`3 <#stressWedge>`__) (Van Baars 2018). The Prandtl Wedge offers an
analytical solution for estimating the extent of settlement beneath a
footing. This model was later refined and is now a standard method for
describing soil shear failure under various shapes and loading
conditions (Terzaghi 1943; Meyerhof 1963; Hansen et al. 1970).

General shear failure under an applied vertical load in unconsolidated
soils occurs along well-defined shear failure planes that divides the
soil into three distinct zones (Figure `3 <#stressWedge>`__). The first
zone is triangular and located directly beneath the applied load, where
the principal stresses are vertical. The shape of this zone is governed
by the soil’s internal angle of friction (:math:`\phi`). The second zone
is a wedge bounded below by a logarithmic spiral. During shear failure,
this wedge moves upward toward the surface, producing soil heave. The
third zone is another triangular region, but here the principal stresses
are horizontal, in contrast to the vertical stresses in the first zone.

The soil bearing capacity is determined by calculating the maximum load
that can be applied to the soil without causing displacement, assuming
failure occurs along the boundaries defined by the Prandtl Wedge (Figure
`3 <#stressWedge>`__). To construct the Prandtl Wedge, the coordinates
of five key points—:math:`A, C, D, E,` and :math:`F`—were calculated to
define the vertices of the three shear failure zones (Figure
`3 <#stressWedge>`__). The equations provided here describe only one
side of the wedge, but the geometry is symmetric. Each point represents
a coordinate (e.g., :math:`A = (A_x, A_y)`). The shape of the wedge
depends on :math:`\phi` and the width (:math:`W`) of the applied load.
First, two angles (:math:`\theta_1` and :math:`\theta_2`) were
calculated based on :math:`\phi`, such that their sum equals a right
angle.

.. math::

   \theta_{1} = \frac{\pi}{4} - \frac{\phi}{2}; \theta_{3} = \frac{\pi}{4} + \frac{\phi}{2}
           \label{eq:wedge_first}

To calculate points :math:`A` and :math:`C`, the applied load is
centered at the origin and located at the surface:

.. math:: A_x = -0.5W; A_y = 0

.. math:: C_x = 0.5W; C_y = 0

Since :math:`\theta_1` depends on :math:`\phi`, point :math:`D` is
derived using trigonometric relationships:

.. math:: D_x = \frac{A_x + C_x}{2};  D_y = \frac{-0.5W}{\tan{\theta_1}}

Next, the length :math:`r_1` is calculated as follows:

.. math:: r_{1} = \sqrt{(D_y - C_y)^2 + (D_x-C_x)^2}

To calculate the length of :math:`r_3` the equation for a logarithmic
spiral is used:

.. math:: r_{3} = r_{1}e^{\frac{\pi}{2}\tan{\phi}}

Then, the length of :math:`r_3` is used to calculate the Cartesian
coordinates of point :math:`E`:

.. math:: E_x = r_{3}\sin{\theta_3} + C_x;  E_y = -r_{3}\cos{\theta_3}

Point :math:`F` is twice the distance of :math:`E_x` and is located on
the surface:

.. math:: F_x = 2E_x - C_x;  F_y = 0

To visualize the slip plane that defines the bottom of zone three, the
logarithmic spiral for the angle spanned by the vector connections
:math:`\overline{CD}` and :math:`\overline{CE}` is calculated as
follows:

.. math:: r_{2} = r_{1}e^{(\theta-\theta_{1})\tan(\phi)};  \theta_1 \leq \theta \leq \theta_1 + \frac{\pi}{2}

The radial values of :math:`r_2` were transformed into Cartesian
coordinates:

.. math:: r_x = r_2\cos(\theta);  r_y = r_2\sin(\theta)

The logarithmic spiral is a parametric equation that defines the radial
length of the wedge. To align :math:`r_2` with points :math:`D` and
:math:`E` the spiral must be rotated by the angle :math:`\alpha`:

.. math:: \alpha = -(2\theta_1 + \frac{\pi}{2})

Finally, the rotation was transformed into Cartesian coordinates as
follows:

.. math::

   r_{xx} = r_x \cos(\alpha) - r_y \sin(\alpha);   r_{yy} = r_x \sin(\alpha) + r_y \cos(\alpha)
           \label{eq:wedge_final}

Thus, :math:`r_{xx}` and :math:`r_{yy}` define the bottom of the wedge
that defines zone two (blue lines in Figure `3 <#stressWedge>`__). To
plot the other side of the wedge, the x-coordinates were multiplied by
negative one to reflect them over the y-axis. A summary of the
derivation can be found in (Van Baars 2018).

.. figure:: Figures/3dd6171b44b06f720a92c89c9c2d5bcfa4adfebf.png
   :name: stressWedge
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

   General shear failure as depicted by the Prandtl Wedge. Zone 1 is the
   triangular region directly beneath the applied load. Zones 2 and 3
   are labeled accordingly. On the left side of the wedge, arrows
   indicate the direction of material movement along the slip planes.
   The arrows along the dashed line show that Zone 2 moves upward toward
   the surface after failure, resulting in soil heave near the point of
   loading.

Results
-------

The P- and S-wave data produced clear and continuous first arrivals. The
S-wave arrivals were always delayed relative to P-wave arrivals. The
subtraction opposite polarity shots generated by the I-beam increased
the signal-to-noise of the first arrivals for the S-wave surveys.
Examples of shot gathers, picked arrivals, and RMSE misfits for the
inversions are provided in the Supplemental Material.

Along L1, tree #1 was located between 4.5 and 5.5 m. Tree #8 was located
between 9.5 and 10.5 m. Tree #8 was one of the smaller trees in the
stand (DBH = 24 cm) and was offset from the profile by 1̃ m (Figure
`4 <#velocityResults>`__\ a–c). Along L2, tree #1 was located between
-6.5 and 5.5 m. Tree #2 was located between -4 and -3 m. Tree #3 was
located between -2 and -1 m. Both tree #2 and #3 were offset from the
profile. Tree #3 was larger than tree #2 with a DBH of 35 cm. Tree #2
was the smallest in the stand with a DBH of 22 cm.

The :math:`V_{p}` profile along L1 showed localized zones of lower
velocities (:math:`V_{p} \le 375` m/s). These low velocity zones
occurred on both sides of tree #1 (Figure `4 <#velocityResults>`__\ b).
The :math:`V_{s}` profile had similar structure to the :math:`V_{p}`,
which included the localized low velocity zones (:math:`V_{s} \le 200`
m/s)on each side of tree #1 (Figure `4 <#velocityResults>`__\ a).
However, unlike the :math:`V_{p}` profile, the :math:`V_{s}` profile
revealed a high-velocity anomaly (:math:`V_{s} \ge 350` m/s) below the
tree. The high-velocity anomaly was approximately 1 to 1.5 m wide and
extended to depths greater than 1.5 m (Figure
`4 <#velocityResults>`__\ a).

The :math:`V_{p}` profile along L2 appeared asymmetrical. From -12 to -6
m, the :math:`V_{p}` profile was dominated by low velocities
(:math:`V_{p} \le 375` m/s) (Figure `4 <#velocityResults>`__\ e). Around
-6 m, a region of higher velocities (:math:`V_{p} \ge 500` m/s) appeared
at elevations less than -1 m. These higher :math:`V_p` approached the
surface under tree #3, where :math:`V_{p}` was greater than 500 m/s. The
:math:`V_{s}` profile had a similar asymmetrical structure to the
:math:`V_{p}`, with lower velocities (:math:`V_{s} \le 200` m/s) from
-12 to - 6 m and higher velocities (:math:`V_{s} \ge 350` m/s) that
approached the surface under tree #3. However, unlike the :math:`V_{p}`
profile, the :math:`V_{s}` profile showed a high-velocity anomaly
(:math:`V_{s} \ge 350` m/s) below tree #1. This high-velocity anomaly
had a similar shape to the anomaly under L1.

Both L1 and L2 revealed low :math:`V_{p}`/:math:`V_{s}` values (<1.5)
under tree #1 (Figure `4 <#velocityResults>`__\ c,f). These low
:math:`V_{p}`/:math:`V_{s}` values were driven by :math:`V_{s}`. A
similar low :math:`V_{p}`/:math:`V_{s}` anomaly occurred under tree #3
along L2 and appeared at the start of L1 between 0 and 1.5 m (Figure
`4 <#velocityResults>`__\ c). Low :math:`V_{p}`/:math:`V_{s}` values
were not visible under trees #8 on L1 and #2 on L2. The
:math:`V_{p}`/:math:`V_{s}` values were higher (> 1.8) near the surface
on either side of tree #1 (`4 <#velocityResults>`__\ c,f). The
:math:`V_{p}`/:math:`V_{s}` values of both profiles matched well at the
intersection (Figure `5 <#vpvs_3d>`__). An Interactive *. html* file of
Figure `5 <#vpvs_3d>`__ is provided in the Supplemental Material
(`Dropbox link for
now <https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/190o9j2b2vnfsxpp112a8/VpVs.html?rlkey=9gzg0jrponucetzqu2oz19061&dl=0>`__).

.. figure:: Figures/dae9477b50fe2288755e5a4d406e9b79cdc7e1da.png
   :name: velocityResults
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

   :math:`V_s`, :math:`V_p`, and :math:`V_p/V_s` values for profiles L1
   and L2, shown without vertical exaggeration. X-axis distances
   correspond to the local coordinate system in Figure `1 <#map>`__\ b.
   The above-ground structure is a 3D point cloud generated via SfM,
   highlighting tree locations. Trees are labeled. Only tree #1 passes
   directly through both profiles. Inverted red triangles indicate
   geophone positions. The top row (panels a and b) displays S-wave
   velocity profiles; the middle row (panels c and d) shows P-wave
   velocity profiles; and the bottom row (panels e and f) presents
   :math:`V_p/V_s` values.




.. figure:: Figures/ce7899d53d677267a6ccb67ed91a15b91822db42.png
   :name: vpvs_3d
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

   A 3D perspective of the :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values along L1 and L2,
   shown without vertical exaggeration. The DEM is plotted over the
   profiles to indicate tree locations. The start of each profile is
   labeled and marked with a black dot. An interactive *.html* file is
   available for download
   `here <https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/190o9j2b2vnfsxpp112a8/VpVs.html?rlkey=9gzg0jrponucetzqu2oz19061&dl=0>`__.

Discussion
----------

Data from two 11.5 m perpendicular :math:`V_{p}` and :math:`V_{s}`
profiles, intersecting beneath a 31 m tall longleaf pine, were presented
(Figure `1 <#map>`__). High-velocity :math:`V_{s}` anomalies were
observed beneath trees #1 and #3 (Figure `4 <#velocityResults>`__). The
:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values remained consistent between the two profiles
and matched at the intersection (Figure `5 <#vpvs_3d>`__). The low
:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values were caused by changes in :math:`V_{s}`
beneath trees #1 and #3 (Figures `4 <#velocityResults>`__ and
`5 <#vpvs_3d>`__).

The shape of the :math:`V_s` and :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values,
specifically the width, depth, and triangular form of the anomalies
beneath tree #1, resembled the failure planes defined by the Prandtl
wedge (Figure `3 <#stressWedge>`__ versus Figure
`4 <#velocityResults>`__). To explore the structural similarities, I
will focus on the :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` profiles. To compare, the seismic
data were transformed from elevation to depth, and each profile was
shifted to place tree #1 at the origin.

To compare, shear failure planes were calculated assuming
:math:`\phi = 28^{\circ}`, a typical value for Piedmont soils (Borden,
Shao, and Gupta 1996; Murdoch et al. 2006). The width of the footing was
set to 66 cm to match the average diameter at the base of tree #1
(Figure `1 <#map>`__). The three zones of the Prandtl wedge were
computed using Equations `[eq:wedge_first] <#eq:wedge_first>`__ to
`[eq:wedge_final] <#eq:wedge_final>`__ and then superimposed on the
:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values from L1 and L2 (Figure
`6 <#stress_compare_vpvs>`__).

The :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values located in each of the three Prandtl
wedge zones were extracted for statistical analysis (Figure
`6 <#stress_compare_vpvs>`__\ c). The distributions included
:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values from L1 and L2. The mean and standard errors
for each zone were: Zone one—:math:`1.25 \pm 0.02` (N=8), Zone
two—:math:`1.45 \pm 0.02` (N=66), and Zone three—:math:`2.02 \pm 0.02`
(N=101). These three distributions had statistically distinct means
(:math:`p < 0.05`) (Figure `6 <#stress_compare_vpvs>`__\ c). The means
remained statistically significant even when the internal friction
angles varied from 20° and 31° (see Supplemental Material). Thus, the
lowest :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values, were associated with the highest
:math:`V_{s}` values and occurred in regions where the largest
displacements under a simple model describing normal shear failure are
expected. These observations, which bridge concepts from seismology and
soil mechanics, suggest the following hypothesis: trees
opportunistically grow vertically oriented roots along shear failure
planes predicted by basic soil mechanics.

Central to this hypothesis are two potential mechanisms that could
explain the increase in :math:`V_{s}` directly beneath the tree. The
first is that vertically oriented roots beneath the tree may like soil
nails or rebars in concrete. By intersecting the potential shear failure
plane, they increase cohesion along the slip surfaces they cross. The
degree of strengthening would depend on the angle at which the roots
intersect these planes. This mechanism is consistent with existing
literature that shows roots increase the soil cohesion (Ali and Osman
2008; Jian et al. 2024; Ghestem et al. 2014).

The second mechanism is that the weight of the tree induced localized
shear strains over time. These strains caused grains to interlock along
failure planes, which increased the shear modulus. Thus, the
:math:`V_{s}` represents a snapshot in time. This may seem
counter-intuitive from a geophysical perspective because the elastic
moduli are assumed to be a static material property. However, in soil
mechanics, it is well known that the mechanical response of a soil will
depend on its stress history. The stress history of a material is
quantified using the overconsolidation ratio (OCR) (Atkinson 2007;
Rajapakse 2015).

Thus, it is critical to understand the connection between the shear
failure envelope (Figure `3 <#stressWedge>`__ and Equations
`[eq:wedge_first] <#eq:wedge_first>`__–`[eq:wedge_final] <#eq:wedge_final>`__)
and the :math:`V_s` velocities measured using seismic refraction (Figure
`4 <#velocityResults>`__). The shear failure planes (Figure
`6 <#stress_compare_vpvs>`__\ a,b; and Figure `3 <#stressWedge>`__) were
derived using a simplified model that assumed the weight of the tree was
uniformly distributed at the soil interface. Under these assumptions,
the failure planes in Figure `3 <#stressWedge>`__ develop when the
downward stress exerted by the tree exceeds the shear strength of the
soil. In other words, the Prandtl Wedge makes a prediction about where
the ground will permanently deform under large loads that exceed the
maximum shear strength of the soil.

In contrast, the :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values estimated using seismic
refraction assume that the soil behaves as an elastic material. This
means there is never permanent deformation. The assumption of linear
elasticity is appropriate for seismic waves, which induce small strains
on the order of :math:`10^{-5}` to :math:`10^{-6}` (Cheng and Johnston
1981; Ng, Pun, and Pang 2000; Kung 2010). This is why the comparison
shown in Figure `6 <#stress_compare_vpvs>`__ is not apples-to-apples.
Figure `6 <#stress_compare_vpvs>`__ compares a prediction where
deformation will occur under large strains (:math:`10^{-2}` to
:math:`10^{0}` ) with the elastic response at small strains where no
permenant deformation will occur. The seismic observations are a
snapshot in time, which includes the material’s deformation history
caused by the increasing stresses as the tree grows. In other words, the
seismic data are sensitive to the material’s dynamic modulus and not a
direct measurement of the shear strength of the soil.

Shear strength and dynamic shear modulus are not the same, but they are
related. Shear strength refers to the maximum stress a material can
withstand before undergoing permanent deformation. In contrast, the
shear modulus is defined as the ratio of shear stress (:math:`\tau`) to
shear strain (:math:`\gamma`), representing the material’s stiffness
under elastic deformation.

.. math::

   %\frac{G}{G_0} = \frac{1}{1 + \frac{\gamma}{\gamma_{ref}}}
           G = \frac{\tau}{\gamma}
           \label{eq:G}

In other words, :math:`G` describes the material’s ability to resist
shear deformation when a shear stress is applied. If the applied
stresses and strains are small, it is reasonable to assume that the
material will behave in a linear and elastic manner. This assumption is
inherent in the construction of the :math:`V_p` and :math:`V_s` profiles
(Figure `4 <#velocityResults>`__).

Understanding how a material responds to larger stresses and strains is
critical for evaluating soil failure. A theoretical stress–strain curve
from a direct shear test is shown in Figure
`7 <#stressStrainCartoon>`__\ a. This curve represents the typical
response of soil during such a test. In a direct shear test, soil is
placed in a small box, and shear stresses are applied to induce a
predictable failure plane along the center of the sample (Gan, Fredlund,
and Rahardjo 1988). This characteristic curve illustrates how soil
responds across a wide range of stresses and strains (Figure
`7 <#stressStrainCartoon>`__\ a). The curve in Figure
`7 <#stressStrainCartoon>`__ was sketched based on general trends
observed in direct shear tests conducted on soils with and without roots
(Ali and Osman 2008; Jian et al. 2024; Ghestem et al. 2014). Numerical
values were omitted to emphasize the curve’s shape—particularly the
increase in peak strength due to root presence—and to highlight how this
behavior relates to the :math:`V_s` profiles shown in Figure
`4 <#velocityResults>`__\ a,b.

The stress–strain curve (Figure `7 <#stressStrainCartoon>`__\ a) is
related to :math:`V_s` through the shear modulus :math:`G` (Equation
`[eq:G] <#eq:G>`__). In a linear elastic framework, which is assumed for
seismic wave propagation, :math:`G` is a material property that
determines the amount of strain produced by a given stress. In the
theoretical stress–strain curve, the shear modulus is illustrated by
colored straight-line segments, representing the slope in this domain
(see Equation `[eq:G] <#eq:G>`__). Under small strains, these segments
provide a good approximation of the material’s response. However, as
stresses and strains increase, the mechanical behavior deviates from
linearity, and a straight line no longer describes the
response—particularly beyond the peak shear strength :math:`\tau`
(Figure `7 <#stressStrainCartoon>`__\ a).

Thus, the relationship between the shear modulus at different strain
values is described by the shear modulus reduction curve (Figure
`7 <#stressStrainCartoon>`__\ b). The modulus reduction curve can be
generated from the direct shear test by calculating the shear modulus
(stress divided by strain) at every point along the curve and
normalizing it using the dynamic shear modulus :math:`G_0`:

.. math::

   %\frac{G}{G_0} = \frac{1}{1 + \frac{\gamma}{\gamma_{ref}}}
           G_0 = \rho V_s^2
           \label{eq:G0}

The normalized shear modulus is plotted against strain, which is also
normalized by the reference strain calculated by dividing the peak shear
strength by :math:`G_0`. This curve is typically shown on a log-linear
scale to emphasize the significant reduction in shear modulus as strain
increases (Figure `7 <#stressStrainCartoon>`__\ b). For linear elastic
and isotropic systems, Equation `[eq:G0] <#eq:G0>`__ is also referred to
in seismology as the shear modulus, with units of pressure, typically
expressed in MPa or GPa. In seismology, :math:`G_0` is often treated as
a constant material property. However, from a soil mechanics
perspective, :math:`G` depends on the stress.

Although :math:`G_0` can be estimated using an assumed soil density of
1600 kg/m\ :sup:`3` (Figure `7 <#stressStrainCartoon>`__\ c,d), these
values are significantly higher than those typically used in soil
mechanics or geotechnical modeling. This discrepancy arises because
buildings or foundations often load the soil beyond the elastic range,
where :math:`G` is no longer valid. Nevertheless, :math:`G_0` represents
the maximum shear modulus, and the modulus reduction curve relates
:math:`G_0` to the shear modulus at the expected strain level (Figure
`7 <#stressStrainCartoon>`__\ b).

Tree #1 was still growing, which indicates that no major shear failure
occurred. However, the slightly elevated topography around its base, and
around other trees in the area, may suggest displacement along the shear
failure envelope during the tree’s growth. This process is analogous to
pressing an object into loose, dry sand, where displaced sand forms a
raised ridge around the depression. Similar raised ridges were visible
in the high-resolution DEM around the larger trees in the study area
(Figures `1 <#map>`__ and `2 <#seismicSetup>`__).

As the tree grew, its increasing mass exerted a greater downward force.
Eventually, the tree’s weight exceeded the soil’s bearing capacity, and
the soil failed. In this context, “failure” refers to soil movement, as
bearing capacity is defined as the maximum load the soil can support
without displacement. The failure was not catastrophic—it was not large
enough to cause the tree to topple. The raised rings observed around
most of the larger trees in the study area are interpreted as evidence
of soil heave (Figure `1 <#map>`__). These raised rings might explain
why there were low :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values observed under tree #3,
which has a larger ring, and not tree #2 and #8 (Figure
`1 <#map>`__\ b). The larger trees a few meters away from the start of
L1 (see Figure `5 <#vpvs_3d>`__). These trees also produced raised rings
that are visible in at the start of Figure `1 <#map>`__\ b.

Tree #1 was not cored, so its age remains unknown. However, based on its
height, the tree is likely between 30 and 50 years old. Unlike civil
infrastructure, which is designed to minimize settlement due to shear
failure, a tree can “fail” in the traditional engineering sense as it
grows. If the soil beneath the tree fails along defined shear planes,
the tree may only need to reinforce a small region directly beneath its
trunk. Alternatively, if strain has already accumulated along the shear
failure plane, the resulting seismic survey could image the shear
strengthening effect caused by the tree’s weight. These results were
unexpected; therefore, we did not core or remove the tree. Additional
geotechnical investigations are needed to distinguish between these two
possible mechanisms.

From a seismological perspective, the observed :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}`
values are significantly lower than expected and warrant further
investigation. :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values below 1.4 are uncommon in
rocks and should be interpreted with caution (Mavko, Mukerji, and
Dvorkin 2009). In perfectly elastic and isotropic materials,
:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values less than or equal to
:math:`\sqrt{2} \approx 1.4` result in a negative Poisson’s ratio.
Materials with negative Poisson’s ratios behave counterintuitively,
contracting laterally when compressed (Acuna et al. 2022; Alderson and
Alderson 2007; Evans and Alderson 2000; Ji et al. 2018; Ji, Wang, and Li
2019). In this study, low :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values were observed
exclusively beneath the tree (Figure `5 <#vpvs_3d>`__). The mean
:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` value derived from both profiles was 1.6, which is
consistent with values reported for dense to loose sands (Thota, Cao,
and Vahedifard 2021).

:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values below 1.4 have previously been documented in
shallow subsurface environments under low confining pressures (B. A.
Flinchum et al. 2024; Trichandi et al. 2022; Liu, Zhu, and Hayes 2022).
It is unlikely that the observed :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values below 1.4
are inversion artifacts for two reasons. First, the velocity models did
not exhibit large velocity contrasts that would have produced
reflections or converted phases. Second, the maximum offset was only
11.5 m, which minimized the space required for phases to separate.
Furthermore, the low :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values appeared as localized
yet continuous structures. If these values were inversion artifacts,
they would have occurred near strong velocity gradients, which were not
observed.

Thus, the final interpretation is that the roots, or displacements along
failure planes caused shear strengthening. Both of these would create an
increase in :math:`V_s`. However, the lack of a clear :math:`V_p` under
the tree suggest that the cracks or pore spaces beneath the tree were
not fully closed; otherwise, there would have been significant increase
in :math:`V_p` (Berryman, Pride, and Wang 2002; Holbrook et al. 2014;
Budiansky and Oconnell 1976). This would have resulted in higher
:math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values. For example, in larger trees such as the
giant redwoods, sequoias, or eucalyptus trees in Tasmania, the weight
may be sufficient to compress the soil, reduce porosity, and increase
the :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values beneath the tree.

The data and discussion provided suggest that further testing is needed,
particularly cross-disciplinary work between near-surface geophysicists
and geotechnical engineers. The observations also suggest that it is
possible to extract more than just structural information from
:math:`V_p` and :math:`V_s`. Furthermore, seismic refraction can be a
valuable tool for studying the hidden and difficult-to-access root
systems that support trees.

.. figure:: Figures/0f0a744bba5f6b2a4e2bda759f68614d1ba78761.png
   :name: stress_compare_vpvs
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

   Comparison between the predicted shear failure planes from the
   Prandtl-wedge model and the :math:`{V_s}` profiles for (a) L1 and (b)
   L2. The Prandtl-wedge was calculated using an internal friction angle
   of :math:`28^{\circ}` (:math:`\phi = 28^{\circ}`). The :math:`V_s`
   profiles were converted from elevation to depth and translated such
   that tree #1 is located at the origin. Additionally, the velocity
   profile for L2 was increased by 10%. (c) Box plots of :math:`V_p/V_s`
   values within the wedge zones shown in panels (a) and (b). The boxes
   represent the first (Q1) and third (Q3) quartiles, with the black
   line indicating the median. Whiskers extend to 1.5 times the
   interquartile range (IQR). The thin horizontal dashed line marks a
   :math:`V_p/V_s` value of :math:`\sqrt{2}`. Changes in :math:`V_p/V_s`
   values are driven by variations in :math:`V_s`, as :math:`V_p`
   remained relatively constant.




.. figure:: Figures/1c3845f12157818b9a1246d7017fc7f67088d093.png
   :name: stressStrainCartoon
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

   (a) An example of a direct shear test illustrating how the shear
   modulus (:math:`G`) changes with increasing strain. The shear modulus
   remains relatively constant up to the maximum shear stress, then
   rapidly decreases after the peak shear stress (:math:`\tau_{max}`) is
   reached. The upper right inset shows the shear failure plane
   developed during the test. (b) A shear modulus reduction curve
   relating the shear modulus, normalized by the small-strain stiffness
   (:math:`G_0`), to the normalized strain. Colored dots correspond to
   different slopes in panel (a). The thick gray line represents a
   standard model, while the thin and dashed black lines correspond to
   the curves from panel (a). (c) :math:`G_0` calculated for L1,
   assuming a soil density of 1600 kg/m\ :sup:`3`. (d) :math:`G_0`
   calculated for L2, also assuming a soil density of 1600
   kg/m\ :sup:`3`.

Conclusion
----------

The data presented here demonstrate the applicability of high-resolution
seismic refraction surveys as a novel tool for investigating the
relationship between tree root structures and soil mechanical
properties. By analyzing P-wave and horizontally polarized S-wave
velocities around a 31 m tall longleaf pine in the South Carolina
Botanical Gardens, minimal changes in :math:`V_p` were observed, while
:math:`V_s` increased, resulting in low :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}` values
directly beneath the tree. These findings suggest that vertical roots
enhance soil shear strength while preserving porosity and
compressibility. The alignment of the observed :math:`V_{p}/V_{s}`
structure with the predicted shear failure envelope implies that trees
may opportunistically grow roots to reinforce soil along shear failure
planes. This research underscores the importance of root–soil
interactions and introduces a non-invasive method for evaluating the
mechanical influence of roots on soil stability. These insights could
have broad implications for forestry, agriculture, and environmental
conservation. Future studies should prioritize interdisciplinary
collaborations to validate these findings across diverse tree species
and environmental settings.

Acknowledgements
----------------

I am grateful to Jonathan Cochran, an undergraduate student, for his
assistance in collecting the seismic refraction data as part of his
senior research project. I sincerely thank Dr. N. (Ravi) Ravichandran
for initiating discussions on tree roots and foundations, and for many
engaging conversations on fundamental soil mechanics. I also appreciate
Dr. Don Hagan for numerous insightful discussions about trees and their
root systems. Special thanks to my colleague George Kouretzis for
reviewing this manuscript prior to submission. As a geophysicist and
critical zone scientist, I approached the geotechnical aspects of this
work with some trepidation, and his feedback was invaluable. I am also
thankful for the many conversations over the years that have shaped my
thinking about making the critical zone more accessible. I am also
thankful for the two reviewers who provided excellent suggestions to
improve this manuscript. This study was supported by Clemson University.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Abe1991

      Abe, Kazutoki, and Robert R. Ziemer. 1991. “Effect of tree roots
      on a shear zone: modeling reinforced shear stress.” *Canadian
      Journal of Forest Research* 21 (7): 1012–19.
      https://doi.org/10.1139/x91-139.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Acuna2022

      Acuna, Daniel, Francisco Gutiérrez, Rodrigo Silva, Humberto Palza,
      Alvaro S. Nunez, and Gustavo Düring. 2022. “A three step recipe
      for designing auxetic materials on demand.” *Communications
      Physics* 5 (1): 113. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-022-00876-5.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Alderson2007

      Alderson, A, and K L Alderson. 2007. “Auxetic materials.”
      *Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part G:
      Journal of Aerospace Engineering* 221 (4): 565–75.
      https://doi.org/10.1243/09544100jaero185.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Ali2008

      Ali, Faisal Haji, and Normaniza Osman. 2008. “Shear Strength of a
      Soil Containing Vegetation Roots.” *Soils and Foundations* 48 (4):
      587–96. https://doi.org/10.3208/sandf.48.587.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Ancelin2004

      Ancelin, Philippe, Benoît Courbaud, and Thierry Fourcaud. 2004.
      “Development of an individual tree-based mechanical model to
      predict wind damage within forest stands.” *Forest Ecology and
      Management* 203 (1-3): 101–21.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2004.07.067.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Atkinson2007

      Atkinson, John. 2007. *The Mechanics of Soils and Foundations*.
      Milton, UNITED KINGDOM: Taylor & Francis Group.
      http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/newcastle/detail.action?docID=308681.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Befus2011

      Befus, K. M., A. F. Sheehan, M. Leopold, S. P. Anderson, and R. S.
      Anderson. 2011. “Seismic Constraints on Critical Zone
      Architecture, Boulder Creek Watershed, Front Range, Colorado.”
      *Vadose Zone Journal* 10 (4): 1342–42.
      https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2010.0108er.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Berryman2002

      Berryman, James G, Steven R Pride, and Herbert F Wang. 2002. “A
      Differential Scheme for Elastic Properties of Rocks with Dry or
      Saturated Cracks.” *Geophysical Journal International* 151 (2):
      597–611. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-246x.2002.01801.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Borden1996

      Borden, Roy H, Lisheng Shao, and Ayushman Gupta. 1996. “Dynamic
      Properties of Piedmont Residual Soils.” *Journal of Geotechnical
      Engineering* 122 (10): 813–21.
      https://doi.org/10.1061/(asce)0733-9410(1996)122:10(813).

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Brantley2011

      Brantley, S. L., J. P. Megonigal, F. N. Scatena, Z.
      Balogh-Brunstad, R. T. Barnes, M. A. Bruns, P. Van Cappellen, et
      al. 2011. “Twelve testable hypotheses on the geobiology of
      weathering.” *Geobiology* 9 (2).
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1472-4669.2010.00264.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Budiansky1976

      Budiansky, B., and Rj Oconnell. 1976. “Elastic-Moduli of a Cracked
      Solid.” *International Journal of Solids and Structures* 12 (2):
      81–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-7683(76)90044-5.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Butnor2001

      Butnor, J. R., J. A. Doolittle, L. Kress, S. Cohen, and K. H.
      Johnsen. 2001. “Use of ground-penetrating radar to study tree
      roots in the southeastern United States.” *Tree Physiology* 21
      (17): 1269–78. https://doi.org/10.1093/treephys/21.17.1269.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Canadell1996

      Canadell, J., R. B. Jackson, J. B. Ehleringer, H. A. Mooney, O. E.
      Sala, and E.-D. Schulze. 1996. “Maximum rooting depth of
      vegetation types at the global scale.” *Oecologia* 108 (4):
      583–95. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00329030.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Cheng1981

      Cheng, C. H., and David H. Johnston. 1981. “Dynamic and Static
      Moduli.” *Geophysical Research Letters* 8 (1): 39–42.
      https://doi.org/10.1029/gl008i001p00039.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Currey1965

      Currey, Donald R. 1965. “An Ancient Bristlecone Pine Stand in
      Eastern Nevada.” *Ecology* 46 (4): 564–66.
      https://doi.org/10.2307/1934900.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Danjon2005

      Danjon, Frédéric, Thierry Fourcaud, and Didier Bert. 2005. “Root
      architecture and wind‐firmness of mature Pinus pinaster.” *New
      Phytologist* 168 (2): 387–400.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2005.01497.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Dijkstra1959

      Dijkstra, E. W. 1959. “A note on two problems in connexion with
      graphs.” *Numerische Mathematik* 1 (1): 269–71.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/bf01386390.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Docker2008

      Docker, B. B., and T. C. T. Hubble. 2008. “Quantifying
      Root-Reinforcement of River Bank Soils by Four Australian Tree
      Species.” *Geomorphology* 100 (3-4): 401–18.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geomorph.2008.01.009.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Dumroese2019

      Dumroese, R. Kasten, Mattia Terzaghi, Donato Chiatante, Gabriella
      S. Scippa, Bruno Lasserre, and Antonio Montagnoli. 2019.
      “Functional Traits of Pinus ponderosa Coarse Roots in Response to
      Slope Conditions.” *Frontiers in Plant Science* 10: 947.
      https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.00947.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Dupuy2007

      Dupuy, Lionel X., Thierry Fourcaud, Patrick Lac, and Alexia
      Stokes. 2007. “A generic 3D finite element model of tree anchorage
      integrating soil mechanics and real root system architecture.”
      *American Journal of Botany* 94 (9): 1506–14.
      https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.94.9.1506.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Ehosioke2020

      Ehosioke, Solomon, Frédéric Nguyen, Sathyanarayan Rao, Thomas
      Kremer, Edmundo Placencia‐Gomez, Johan Alexander Huisman, Andreas
      Kemna, Mathieu Javaux, and Sarah Garré. 2020. “Sensing the
      Electrical Properties of Roots: A Review.” *Vadose Zone Journal*
      19 (1). https://doi.org/10.1002/vzj2.20082.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Evans2000

      Evans, K E, and K L Alderson. 2000. “Auxetic materials: the
      positive side of being negative.” *Engineering Science & Education
      Journal* 9 (4): 148–54. https://doi.org/10.1049/esej:20000402.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Flinchum2024

      Flinchum, B. A., D. Grana, B. J. Carr, N. Ravichandran, B.
      Eppinger, and W. S. Holbrook. 2024. “Low Vp/Vs Values as an
      Indicator for Fractures in the Critical Zone.” *Geophysical
      Research Letters* 51 (2). https://doi.org/10.1029/2023gl105946.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Flinchum2018_3d

      Flinchum, Brady A., W. Steven Holbrook, Daniella Rempe, Seulgi
      Moon, Clifford S. Riebe, Bradley J. Carr, Jorden L. Hayes, James
      St. Clair, and Marc Philipp Peters. 2018. “Critical Zone Structure
      Under a Granite Ridge Inferred From Drilling and Three‐Dimensional
      Seismic Refraction Data.” *Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth
      Surface* 123 (6): 1317–43. https://doi.org/10.1029/2017jf004280.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Gan1988

      Gan, J. K. M., D. G. Fredlund, and H. Rahardjo. 1988.
      “Determination of the Shear Strength Parameters of an Unsaturated
      Soil Using the Direct Shear Test.” *Canadian Geotechnical Journal*
      25 (3): 500–510. https://doi.org/10.1139/t88-055.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Ghestem2014

      Ghestem, Murielle, Guillaume Veylon, Alain Bernard, Quentin Vanel,
      and Alexia Stokes. 2014. “Influence of plant root system
      morphology and architectural traits on soil shear resistance.”
      *Plant and Soil* 377 (1-2): 43–61.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-012-1572-1.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Giadrossich2017

      Giadrossich, F., M. Schwarz, D. Cohen, A. Cislaghi, C. Vergani, T.
      Hubble, C. Phillips, and A. Stokes. 2017. “Methods to measure the
      mechanical behaviour of tree roots: A review.” *Ecological
      Engineering* 109: 256–71.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2017.08.032.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Guo2013

      Guo, Li, Jin Chen, Xihong Cui, Bihang Fan, and Henry Lin. 2013.
      “Application of ground penetrating radar for coarse root detection
      and quantification: a review.” *Plant and Soil* 362 (1-2): 1–23.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-012-1455-5.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Hansen1970

      Hansen, J. Brinch, J. Brinch, Hansen bullet, and Ses nan. 1970. “A
      Revised and Extended Formula for Bearing Capacity.” In.
      https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:127983665.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Hickey2000

      Hickey, John, Parry Kostoglou, and Graham Sargison. 2000.
      “Tasmania’s tallest trees.” *Tasforests* 12 (January): 105–22.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Holbrook2014

      Holbrook, W. Steven, Clifford S. Riebe, Mehrez Elwaseif, Jorden L.
      Hayes, Kyle Basler‐Reeder, Dennis L. Harry, Armen Malazian,
      Anthony Dosseto, Peter C. Hartsough, and Jan W. Hopmans. 2014.
      “Geophysical constraints on deep weathering and water storage
      potential in the Southern Sierra Critical Zone Observatory.”
      *Earth Surface Processes and Landforms* 39 (3): 366–80.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/esp.3502.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Hruska1999

      Hruska, Jiri, Jan Čermák, and Svatopluk Šustek. 1999. “Mapping
      tree root systems with ground-penetrating radar.” *Tree
      Physiology* 19 (2): 125–30.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/treephys/19.2.125.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Hunter2022

      Hunter, James A., Heather L. Crow, William J. Stephenson, André
      J.-M. Pugin, Robert A. Williams, James B. Harris, Jack K. Odum,
      and Edward W. Woolery. 2022. “Seismic site characterization with
      shear wave (SH) reflection and refraction methods.” *Journal of
      Seismology*. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10950-021-10042-z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Jackson1996

      Jackson, R. B., J. Canadell, J. R. Ehleringer, H. A. Mooney, O. E.
      Sala, and E. D. Schulze. 1996. “A global analysis of root
      distributions for terrestrial biomes.” *Oecologia* 108 (3):
      389–411. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00333714.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Ji2018

      Ji, Shaocheng, Le Li, Hem Bahadur Motra, Frank Wuttke, Shengsi
      Sun, Katsuyoshi Michibayashi, and Matthew H. Salisbury. 2018.
      “Poisson’s Ratio and Auxetic Properties of Natural Rocks.”
      *Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth* 123 (2): 1161–85.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/2017jb014606.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Ji2019

      Ji, Shaocheng, Qin Wang, and Le Li. 2019. “Seismic velocities,
      Poisson’s ratios and potential auxetic behavior of volcanic
      rocks.” *Tectonophysics* 766: 270–82.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tecto.2019.06.013.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Jian2024

      Jian, Shengqi, Yixue Niu, Xueli Zhang, Yi Wei, and Jun Gao. 2024.
      “Study on Shear Strength of Soil–Root Systems of Different
      Vegetation Types.” *Plants* 13 (21): 2963.
      https://doi.org/10.3390/plants13212963.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Kevern1983

      Kevern, T. C., and Arnel R. Hallauer. 1983. “Relation of Verital
      Root-Pull Resistance and Flowering in Maize.” *Crop Science* 23
      (2): cropsci1983.0011183X002300020041x.
      https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.2135/cropsci1983.0011183X002300020041x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Kung2010

      Kung, Gordon Tung-Chin. 2010. “Finite Element Analysis.”
      https://doi.org/10.5772/10234.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Labuz2012

      Labuz, Joseph F., and Arno Zang. 2012. “Mohr–Coulomb Failure
      Criterion.” *Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering* 45 (6): 975–79.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s00603-012-0281-7.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Li2024

      Li, Xinyue, Kai Jin, Peng Qin, Chunxia Liu, Xiuzhi Zhu, Yuyang
      Zhang, and Quanli Zong. 2024. “Enhancement Effect of Phragmites
      australis Roots on Soil Shear Strength in the Yellow River Delta.”
      *Sustainability* 16 (23): 10657.
      https://doi.org/10.3390/su162310657.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Liu2022

      Liu, Xuejian, Tieyuan Zhu, and Jorden Hayes. 2022. “Critical Zone
      Structure by Elastic Full Waveform Inversion of Seismic
      Refractions in a Sandstone Catchment, Central Pennsylvania, USA.”
      *Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth* 127 (3).
      https://doi.org/10.1029/2021jb023321.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-SIFT

      Lowe, D. G. 1999. “Object Recognition from Local Scale-Invariant
      Features.” In *Proceedings of the Seventh IEEE International
      Conference on Computer Vision*, 2:1150–1157 vol.2.
      https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.1999.790410.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Mavko2009

      Mavko, Gary, Tapan Mukerji, and Jack Dvorkin. 2009. “The Rock
      Physics Handbook,” 21–80.
      https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511626753.003.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Meyerhof1963

      Meyerhof, George Geoffrey. 1963. “Some Recent Research on the
      Bearing Capacity of Foundations.” *Canadian Geotechnical Journal*
      1 (1): 16–26. https://doi.org/10.1139/t63-003.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Micheletti2015

      Micheletti, Natan, Jim H Chandler, and Stuart N Lane. 2015.
      “Structure from Motion (SfM) Photogrammetry.” *Geomorphological
      Techniques*, January, 12.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Mickovski2002

      Mickovski, Slobodan B., and A. Roland Ennos. 2002. “A
      Morphological and Mechanical Study of the Root Systems of
      Suppressed Crown Scots Pine Pinus Sylvestris.” *Trees* 16 (4):
      274–80. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00468-002-0177-3.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Miller2006

      Miller, Ashley T, H Lee Allen, and Chris A Maier. 2006.
      “Quantifying the coarse-root biomass of intensively managed
      loblolly pine plantations.” *Canadian Journal of Forest Research*
      36 (1): 12–22. https://doi.org/10.1139/x05-229.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Montagnoli2019

      Montagnoli, Antonio, Mattia Terzaghi, Donato Chiatante, Gabriella
      S. Scippa, Bruno Lasserre, and R. Kasten Dumroese. 2019. “Ongoing
      modifications to root system architecture of Pinus ponderosa
      growing on a sloped site revealed by tree-ring analysis.”
      *Dendrochronologia* 58: 125650.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dendro.2019.125650.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Moser1992

      Moser, T. J., G. Nolet, and R. Snieder. 1992. “Ray bending
      revisited.” *Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America* 82
      (1): 259–88. http://www.bssaonline.org/content/82/1/259.short.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Moser1991

      Moser, Tj. 1991. “Shortest-Path Calculation of Seismic Rays.”
      *Geophysics* 56 (1): 59–67. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.1442958.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Murdoch2006

      Murdoch, Lawrence C, James R Richardson, Qingfeng Tan, Shaun C
      Malin, and Cedric Fairbanks. 2006. “Forms and sand transport in
      shallow hydraulic fractures in residual soil.” *Canadian
      Geotechnical Journal* 43 (10): 1061–73.
      https://doi.org/10.1139/t06-063.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Ng2000

      Ng, Charles W. W., W. K. Pun, and Richard P. L. Pang. 2000. “Small
      Strain Stiffness of Natural Granitic Saprolite in Hong Kong.”
      *Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering* 126
      (9): 819–33.
      https://doi.org/10.1061/(asce)1090-0241(2000)126:9(819).

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Proto2020

      Proto, Andrea R., Antonino Di Iorio, Lorenzo M. Abenavoli, and
      Agostino Sorgonà. 2020. “A sonic root detector for revealing tree
      coarse root distribution.” *Scientific Reports* 10 (1): 8075.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-65047-4.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Rajapakse2015

      Rajapakse, Ruwan Abey. 2015. *Geotechnical Engineering
      Calculations and Rules of Thumb*. Chantilly, UNITED STATES:
      Elsevier Science & Technology.
      http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/newcastle/detail.action?docID=4098036.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Robinson2012

      Robinson, Judith L., Lee D. Slater, and Karina V. R. Schäfer.
      2012. “Evidence for Spatial Variability in Hydraulic
      Redistribution Within an Oak–Pine Forest from Resistivity
      Imaging.” *Journal of Hydrology* 430: 69–79.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2012.02.002.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Rucker2017

      Rücker, Carsten, Thomas Günther, and Florian M. Wagner. 2017.
      “pyGIMLi: An open-source library for modelling and inversion in
      geophysics.” *Computers & Geosciences* 109: 106–23.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2017.07.011.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Sellier2020

      Sellier, Damien, and Satoru Suzuki. 2020. “Age Dynamics of Wind
      Risk and Tree Sway Characteristics in a Softwood Plantation.”
      *Frontiers in Forests and Global Change* 3: 89.
      https://doi.org/10.3389/ffgc.2020.00089.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Sheehan2005

      Sheehan, J R, W E Doll, and W A Mandell. 2005. “An Evaluation of
      Methods and Available Software for Seismic Refraction Tomography
      Analysis.” *Journal of Environmental & Engineering Geophysics* 10
      (1): 21–34. https://doi.org/10.2113/jeeg10.1.21.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Stein2003

      Stein, Seth, and Michael Wysession. 2003. *An Introduction to
      Seismology Earthquakes, and Earth Structure*. Malden, MA:
      Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Stokes2009

      Stokes, Alexia, Claire Atger, Anthony Glyn Bengough, Thierry
      Fourcaud, and Roy C. Sidle. 2009. “Desirable plant root traits for
      protecting natural and engineered slopes against landslides.”
      *Plant and Soil* 324 (1-2): 1–30.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-009-0159-y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Taufiqurrachman2023

      Taufiqurrachman, Mochammad, Utami Dyah Syafitri, Mohamad Miftah
      Rahman, Iskandar Z. Siregar, and Lina Karlinasari. 2023.
      “Clarifying the Main Root Distribution of Trees in Varied Slope
      Environments Using Non-Destructive Root Detection.” *Forests* 14
      (12): 2434. https://doi.org/10.3390/f14122434.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Terzaghi1943

      Terzaghi, Karl. 1943. “Bearing Capacity.” In *Theoretical Soil
      Mechanics*, 118–43. John Wiley; Sons, Ltd.
      https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470172766.ch8.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Thota2021

      Thota, Sannith Kumar, Toan Duc Cao, and Farshid Vahedifard. 2021.
      “Poisson’s Ratio Characteristic Curve of Unsaturated Soils.”
      *Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering* 147
      (1). https://doi.org/10.1061/(asce)gt.1943-5606.0002424.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Tomobe2023

      Tomobe, Haruka, Satoru Tsugawa, Yuki Yoshida, Tetsuya Arita, Allen
      Yi-Lun Tsai, Minoru Kubo, Taku Demura, and Shinichiro Sawa. 2023.
      “A mechanical theory of competition between plant root growth and
      soil pressure reveals a potential mechanism of root penetration.”
      *Scientific Reports* 13 (1): 7473.
      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-34025-x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Tredici1999

      Tredici, Peter Del. 1999. “Redwood Burls: Immortality
      Underground.” *JSTOR* 59 (3): 14–22.
      http://www.jstor.org/stable/42954786.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Trichandi2022

      Trichandi, Rahmantara, Klaus Bauer, Trond Ryberg, Dirk Scherler,
      Klaus Bataille, and Charlotte M. Krawczyk. 2022. “Combined seismic
      and borehole investigation of the deep granite weathering
      structure—Santa Gracia Reserve case in Chile.” *Earth Surface
      Processes and Landforms*. https://doi.org/10.1002/esp.5457.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Uecker2023

      Uecker, Rachel Kaitlyn, Brady Adams Flinchum, W. Steven Holbrook,
      and Bradley James Carr. 2023. “Mapping bedrock topography: a
      seismic refraction survey and landscape analysis in the Laramie
      Range, Wyoming.” *Frontiers in Water* 5: 1057725.
      https://doi.org/10.3389/frwa.2023.1057725.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Uhlemann2016

      Uhlemann, S., S. Hagedorn, B. Dashwood, H. Maurer, D. Gunn, T.
      Dijkstra, and J. Chambers. 2016. “Landslide characterization using
      P- and S-wave seismic refraction tomography — The importance of
      elastic moduli.” *Journal of Applied Geophysics* 134: 64–76.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jappgeo.2016.08.014.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-VanBaars2018

      Van Baars, Stefan. 2018. *100 Years of Prandtl’s Wedge*.
      https://ebooks.iospress.nl/book/100-years-of-prandtls-wedge.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Westoby2012

      Westoby, M. J., J. Brasington, N. F. Glasser, M. J. Hambrey, and
      J. M. Reynolds. 2012. “‘Structure-from-Motion’ photogrammetry: A
      low-cost, effective tool for geoscience applications.”
      *Geomorphology* 179: 300–314.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geomorph.2012.08.021.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Yang2014

      Yang, Ming, Pauline Défossez, Frédéric Danjon, and Thierry
      Fourcaud. 2014. “Tree stability under wind: simulating uprooting
      with root breakage using a finite element method.” *Annals of
      Botany* 114 (4): 695–709. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcu122.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Yang2019

      Yang, Xiao-Dong, Ya-Dong Qie, De-Xiong Teng, Arshad Ali, Yilu Xu,
      Nanthi Bolan, Wei-Guo Liu, et al. 2019. “Prediction of groundwater
      depth in an arid region based on maximum tree height.” *Journal of
      Hydrology* 574: 46–52.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2019.04.022.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Zajicova2019

      Zajícová, Katerina, and Tomas Chuman. 2019. “Application of ground
      penetrating radar methods in soil studies: A review.” *Geoderma*
      343: 116–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2019.02.024.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-Zelt2013

      Zelt, C A, S Haines, M H Powers, J Sheehan, S Rohdewald, C Link, K
      Hayashi, et al. 2013. “Blind Test of Methods for Obtaining 2-D
      Near-Surface Seismic Velocity Models from First-Arrival
      Traveltimes.” *Journal of Environmental & Engineering Geophysics*
      18 (3): 183–94. https://doi.org/10.2113/jeeg18.3.183.
